TITLE: Against Moral Self-Satisfaction
WORK: The Gay Science
SECTION: Cheers for Physics!, selected excerpt
AUTHOR: Friedrich Nietzsche
THEMES: conscience, morality, self-observation, self-knowledge, critique
SOURCE_TYPE: text

Cheers for Physics!—How many men are there who know how to observe? And among the few who do know,—how many observe themselves? "Everyone is furthest from himself"—all the "triers of the reins" know that to their discomfort; and the saying, "Know thyself," in the mouth of a God and spoken to man, is almost a mockery.

Everyone seems inclined to say to you: "Why, my dear Sir, that is precisely my affair! You address yourself with your question to him who is authorised to answer, for I happen to be wiser with regard to this matter than in anything else. Therefore, when a man decides that 'this is right,' when he accordingly concludes that 'it must therefore be done,' and thereupon does what he has thus recognised as right and designated as necessary—then the nature of his action is moral!"

But, my friend, you are talking to me about three actions instead of one: your deciding, for instance, that "this is right," is also an action,—could one not judge either morally or immorally?

Why do you regard this, and just this, as right? “Because my conscience tells me so; conscience never speaks immorally, indeed it determines in the first place what shall be moral!”

But why do you listen to the voice of your conscience? And in how far are you justified in regarding such a judgment as true and infallible?

Your decision, “this is right,” has a previous history in your impulses, your likes and dislikes, your experiences and non-experiences; “how has it originated?” you must ask, and afterwards the further question: “what really impels me to give ear to it?”

That you hear this or that judgment as the voice of conscience, consequently, that you feel a thing to be right—may have its cause in the fact that you have never reflected about yourself, and have blindly accepted from your childhood what has been designated to you as right.

The persistency of your moral judgment might still be just a proof of personal wretchedness or impersonality; your “moral force” might have its source in your obstinacy—or in your incapacity to perceive new ideals!

And to be brief: if you had thought more acutely, observed more accurately, and had learned more, you would no longer under all circumstances call this and that your “duty” and your “conscience.”