TITLE: The Ascetic Ideal and the Meaning of Suffering
WORK: On the Genealogy of Morality
SECTION: Third Essay, selected excerpt
AUTHOR: Friedrich Nietzsche
THEMES: ascetic ideal, meaning, suffering, nihilism, will to nothingness
SOURCE_TYPE: text

If you except the ascetic ideal, man, the animal man had no meaning. His existence on earth contained no end; "What is the purpose of man at all?" was a question without an answer; the will for man and the world was lacking.

The ascetic ideal simply means this: that something was lacking, that a tremendous void encircled man—he did not know how to justify himself, to explain himself, to affirm himself, he suffered from the problem of his own meaning. He suffered also in other ways, he was in the main a diseased animal; but his problem was not suffering itself, but the lack of an answer to that crying question, "To what purpose do we suffer?"

Man, the bravest animal and the one most inured to suffering, does not repudiate suffering in itself: he wills it, he even seeks it out, provided that he is shown a meaning for it, a purpose of suffering. Not suffering, but the senselessness of suffering was the curse which till then lay spread over humanity—and the ascetic ideal gave it a meaning.

The explanation brought in its train new suffering, deeper, more penetrating, more venomous, gnawing more brutally into life: it brought all suffering under the perspective of guilt; but in spite of all that man was saved thereby, he had a meaning, and from henceforth was no more like a leaf in the wind, a shuttle-cock of chance, of nonsense.

The ascetic ideal was the only meaning that existed; any meaning is better than no meaning. In that ideal suffering found an explanation; the tremendous gap seemed filled; the door to all suicidal nihilism was closed.

It is absolutely impossible to disguise what in point of fact is made clear by every complete will that has taken its direction from the ascetic ideal: this hate of the human, and even more of the animal, and more still of the material, this horror of the senses, of reason itself, this fear of happiness and beauty, this desire to get right away from all illusion, change, growth, death, wishing and desiring—all this means a will for nothingness, a will opposed to life, a repudiation of the most fundamental conditions of life; but it is and remains a will.

Man will wish nothingness rather than not wish at all.