TITLE: The Ascetic Priest and the Management of Suffering
WORK: On the Genealogy of Morality
SECTION: Third Essay, selected excerpt
AUTHOR: Friedrich Nietzsche
THEMES: ascetic priest, suffering, resentment, weakness, herd
SOURCE_TYPE: text

The ascetic priest must be accepted as the predestined saviour, herdsman, and champion of the sick herd: thereby do we first understand his awful historic mission. The lordship over sufferers is his kingdom; to that points his instinct, in that he finds his own special art, his master-skill, his kind of happiness.

He must himself be sick, he must be kith and kin to the sick and the abortions so as to understand them, so as to arrive at an understanding with them; but he must also be strong, even more master of himself than of others, impregnable in his will for power, so as to acquire the trust and the awe of the weak.

He has to protect them against whom? Against the healthy, doubtless also against the envy towards the healthy. He must be the natural adversary and scorner of every rough, stormy, reinless, hard, violently-predatory health and power.

He brings with him, doubtless, salve and balsam; but before he can play the physician he must first wound. So, while he soothes the pain which the wound makes, he at the same time poisons the wound.

Every sufferer searches instinctively for a cause of his suffering; to put it more precisely, a sentient responsible doer, something living, on which, either actually or in effigie, he can vent his emotions. For the venting of emotions is the sufferer’s greatest attempt at alleviation, his mechanically desired narcotic against pain.

The ascetic priest says to the sufferer: "Quite so, my sheep, it must be the fault of some one; but thou thyself art that some one, it is all the fault of thyself alone against thyself." That is bold enough, false enough, but one thing is attained: the course of resentment is diverted.

What was done was to make the sick harmless up to a certain point, to destroy the incurable by means of themselves, to turn the milder cases severely on to themselves, to give their resentment a backward direction, and to exploit similarly the bad instincts of all sufferers with a view to self-discipline, self-surveillance, self-mastery.