TITLE: Bad Conscience and Internalization
WORK: On the Genealogy of Morality
SECTION: Second Essay, selected excerpt
AUTHOR: Friedrich Nietzsche
THEMES: bad conscience, internalization, instinct, self-torment
SOURCE_TYPE: text

I regard the bad conscience as the serious illness which man was bound to contract under the stress of the most radical change which he has ever experienced—that change, when he found himself finally imprisoned within the pale of society and of peace.

Just like the plight of the water-animals, when they were compelled either to become land-animals or to perish, so was the plight of these half-animals, perfectly adapted as they were to the savage life of war, prowling, and adventure—suddenly all their instincts were rendered worthless and switched off. Henceforward they had to walk on their feet, carry themselves, whereas heretofore they had been carried by the water: a terrible heaviness oppressed them.

Those old instincts had not immediately ceased their demands. Only it was difficult and rarely possible to gratify them: speaking broadly, they were compelled to satisfy themselves by new and, as it were, hole-and-corner methods. All instincts which do not find a vent without, turn inwards—this is what I mean by the growing internalisation of man: consequently we have the first growth in man of what subsequently was called his soul.

These terrible bulwarks, with which the social organisation protected itself against the old instincts of freedom, brought it about that all those instincts of wild, free, prowling man became turned backwards against man himself. Enmity, cruelty, the delight in persecution, in surprises, change, destruction—the turning all these instincts against their own possessors: this is the origin of the bad conscience.

It was man, who, lacking external enemies and obstacles, and imprisoned as he was in the oppressive narrowness and monotony of custom, in his own impatience lacerated, persecuted, gnawed, frightened, and ill-treated himself. It was this animal in the hands of the tamer, which beat itself against the bars of its cage; it was this being who, pining and yearning for that desert home of which it had been deprived, was compelled to create out of its own self an adventure, a torture-chamber, a hazardous and perilous desert—it was this fool, this homesick and desperate prisoner—who invented the bad conscience.

This instinct of freedom forced back, trodden back, imprisoned within itself, and finally only able to find vent and relief in itself—this, only this, is the beginning of the bad conscience.