TITLE: Self-Surpassing
WORK: Thus Spoke Zarathustra
SECTION: Self-Surpassing
AUTHOR: Friedrich Nietzsche
THEMES: self-overcoming, will to power, creation, values, surpassing
SOURCE_TYPE: text

“Will to Truth” do ye call it, ye wisest ones, that which impelleth you and maketh you ardent?

Will for the thinkableness of all being: thus do I call your will!

All being would ye make thinkable: for ye doubt with good reason whether it be already thinkable.

Ye would still create a world before which ye can bow the knee: such is your ultimate hope and ecstasy.

It was ye, ye wisest ones, who put such guests in this boat, and gave them pomp and proud names⁠—ye and your ruling Will!

It is not the river that is your danger and the end of your good and evil, ye wisest ones: but that Will itself, the Will to Power⁠—the unexhausted, procreating life-will.

Wherever I found a living thing, there found I Will to Power; and even in the will of the servant found I the will to be master.

That to the stronger the weaker shall serve⁠—thereto persuadeth he his will who would be master over a still weaker one. That delight alone he is unwilling to forego.

And as the lesser surrendereth himself to the greater that he may have delight and power over the least of all, so doth even the greatest surrender himself, and staketh life, for the sake of power.

And where there is sacrifice and service and love-glances, there also is the will to be master.

And this secret spake Life herself unto me. “Behold,” said she, “I am that which must ever surpass itself.

“To be sure, ye call it will to procreation, or impulse towards a goal, towards the higher, remoter, more manifold: but all that is one and the same secret.

“Rather would I succumb than disown this one thing; and verily, where there is succumbing and leaf-falling, lo, there doth Life sacrifice itself⁠—for power!

“Only where there is life, is there also will: not, however, Will to Life, but⁠—so teach I thee⁠—Will to Power!”

Verily, I say unto you: good and evil which would be everlasting⁠—it doth not exist! Of its own accord must it ever surpass itself anew.

And he who hath to be a creator in good and evil⁠—verily, he hath first to be a destroyer, and break values in pieces.

Thus doth the greatest evil pertain to the greatest good: that, however, is the creating good.