TITLE: The Eternal Return
WORK: Thus Spoke Zarathustra
SECTION: The Vision and the Enigma / The Convalescent, selected excerpt
AUTHOR: Friedrich Nietzsche
THEMES: eternal return, recurrence, fate, affirmation, burden
SOURCE_TYPE: text

“Observe,” continued I, “This Moment! From the gateway, This Moment, there runneth a long eternal lane backwards: behind us lieth an eternity.

“Must not whatever can run its course of all things, have already run along that lane? Must not whatever can happen of all things have already happened, resulted, and gone by?

“And if everything have already existed, what thinkest thou, dwarf, of This Moment? Must not this gateway also⁠—have already existed?

“And are not all things closely bound together in such wise that This Moment draweth all coming things after it? Consequently⁠—itself also?

“For whatever can run its course of all things, also in this long lane outward⁠—must it once more run!”

“O ye wags and barrel-organs!” answered Zarathustra, “how well do ye know what had to be fulfilled in seven days.”

And ye have made a lyre-lay out of it?

“O Zarathustra,” said his animals, “to those who think like us, things all dance themselves: they come and hold out the hand and laugh and flee⁠—and return.

“Everything goeth, everything returneth; eternally rolleth the wheel of existence. Everything dieth, everything blossometh forth again; eternally runneth on the year of existence.

“Everything breaketh, everything is integrated anew; eternally buildeth itself the same house of existence. All things separate, all things again greet one another; eternally true to itself remaineth the ring of existence.

“Every moment beginneth existence, around every ‘Here’ rolleth the ball ‘There.’ The middle is everywhere. Crooked is the path of eternity.”

“Behold,” his animals continued, “we know what thou teachest: that all things eternally return, and ourselves with them, and that we have already existed times without number, and all things with us.

“Thou teachest that there is a great year of Becoming, a prodigy of a great year; it must, like a sandglass, ever turn up anew, that it may anew run down and run out:

“So that all those years are like one another in the greatest and also in the smallest, so that we ourselves, in every great year, are like ourselves in the greatest and also in the smallest.”